12 July 2001 FINAL A5-0263/2001
REPORT
on the Commission communication on accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases within the context of poverty reduction
( COM(2000) 585 – C5‑0014/2001 – 2001/2006(COS) )
on the Commission communication on a Programme for Action: Accelerated action on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis in the context of poverty reduction
( COM(2001) 96 – C5‑0112/2001 – 2001/2006(COS) )
Committee on Development and Cooperation
Rapporteur:
Bashir Khanbhai
286.865 CONTENTS
PROCEDURAL PAGE
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT
OPINION of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy
OPINION of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy
OPINION of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities
PROCEDURAL PAGE
By letter of 21 September 2000, the Commission forwarded to Parliament a communication on accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases within the context of poverty reduction ( COM(2000) 585 – 2001/2006(COS)).
At the sitting of 18 January 2001 the President of Parliament announced that she had referred the communication to the Committee on Development and Cooperation as the committee responsible and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities for their opinions ( C5‑0014/2001 ).
At the sitting of 15 February 2001, the President of Parliament announced that she had referred the communication also to the Committee on Budgets for an opinion.
The Committee on Development and Cooperation appointed Bashir Khanbhai rapporteur at its meeting of 5 February 2001.
By letter of 23 February 2001, the Commission forwarded to Parliament a communication on a Programme for Action: Accelerated action on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis in the context of poverty reduction ( COM(2001) 96 - 2001/2006 (COS)).
At the sitting of 15 March 2001, the President of Parliament announced that she had referred the communication to the Committee on Development and Cooperation as the committee responsible and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, Committee on Budgets, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities for their opinions ( C5‑0112/2001 ).
The committee considered the Commission communications and the draft report at its meetings of 14 May 2001 and 25 June 2001.
It adopted the motion for a resolution unanimously at its meeting of 10 July 2001
The following were present for the vote: Joaquim Miranda, chairman; Margrietus J. van den Berg, vice-chairman; Fernando Fernández Martín, vice-chairman; Bashir Khanbhai, rapporteur; Giuseppe Brienza, Marie-Arlette Carlotti, John Alexander Corrie, Michel J.M. Dary (for Wolfgang Kreissl-Dörfler), Gianfranco Dell'Alba (for Marco Pannella), Nirj Deva, Concepció Ferrer (for Domenico Mennitti),Jean-Claude Fruteau, Richard Howitt, Renzo Imbeni, Karin Junker, Glenys Kinnock, Karsten Knolle, Mario Mantovani (for Vitaliano Gemelli), Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez, Emilio Menéndez del Valle (for José María Mendiluce Pereiro), Luisa Morgantini (for Yasmine Boudjenah), Hervé Novelli, Didier Rod, Ulla Margrethe Sandbæk, Francisca Sauquillo Pérez del Arco, Bob van den Bos, Stavros Xarchakos, Jürgen Zimmerling.
The opinions of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities are attached.
On 6 November 2000, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy decided not to deliver an opinion and on 27 February 2001, the Committee on Budgets decided not to deliver an opinion.
The report was tabled on 12 July 2001.
The deadline for tabling amendments will be indicated in the draft agenda for the relevant part-session.
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION European Parliament resolution on the Commission communication on accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases within the context of poverty reduction ( COM(2000) 585 – C5‑0014/2001 – 2001/2006(COS)) and
on the Commission communication on a Programme for Action: accelerated action on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis in the context of poverty reduction ( COM(2001) 96 - C5-0112/2001 - 2001/2006(COS))
The European Parliament ,
- having regard to the Commission communication ( COM(2000) 585 – C5‑0014/200 ),
- having regard to the Commission communication ( COM(2001) 96 – C5‑0112/2001 ),
- having regard to the Round Table on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis (28 September 2000), convened by the European Commission under the aegis of the French Presidency and co-sponsored by the World Health Organisation and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS,
- having regard to the Council Resolution on Communicable diseases and poverty (10 November 2000), Council - Development - Press 421 No. 12929/00
- having regard to the Commission's proposal on the Sixth Framework Programme on Research and Development ( COM(2001) 94 ) OJ C 180 of 26.6.2001 ,
- having regard to its resolution of 1 March 2001 Adopted text, point 12, A5-0059/2001 on the European Community's development policy which calls, in order to combat the scourge of HIV/AIDS and diseases induced by them, for the application of the principle of granting free licences to the countries concerned for the manufacture and marketing of appropriate medicines, in accordance with the principle of health emergency,
- having regard to its resolution of 15 March 2001 Adopted text, point 13, B5-0182/2001 on access to drugs for HIV/AIDS victims in the Third World,
- having regard to the resolution of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly on the importation and local production of generic drugs (ACP-EU 3173/01),
- having regard to Rule 47(1) of its Rules of Procedure,
- having regard to the report of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the opinions of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities ( A5‑0263/2001 ),
A. these three communicable diseases are the major burden of diseases affecting the poorest people, especially women and children, in developing countries causing the deaths of more than five million people annually; and all these three diseases are still on the increase despite existing efforts,
B. the increasing threat to social and economic development of people in developing countries posed by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria demands a prompt, effective and comprehensive national and global response, in addition to existing efforts ,
C. international mobilisation and the introduction of a global scheme geared to facilitating access to treatment for these diseases in developing countries must therefore involve a considerable increase in the financial resources earmarked for combating communicable diseases and improving health systems in the countries of the South,
D. inability to secure treatment through lack of access to medicines, and social exclusion, especially of women , disables the workforce and increases poverty risking stability in developing countries,
E. the question of cutting the price of drugs is at the heart of reflections on the creation of a global and transparent scheme for access to treatment, particularly for AIDS.
Recent developments have shown that prices can be radically reduced and therefore confirm that price is a barrier to access to essential and generic medicines which can be overcome.
Nevertheless, access to effective drugs and treatment is also hindered by many obstacles (capacity and budget of health systems, quality of medical follow-up, etc.),
F. the right to health of thousands of people hit by epidemics in developing countries prevails over the right to the commercial exploitation of patents connected to these scourges, particularly given that research spending can be recouped from the sale of drugs in developed countries.
The commercial exploitation of patents on drugs in general has only been permitted for a few decades and the limits should now be clearly set,
G. treatments are often not available due to a lack of appropriate research and consequent production of drugs on grounds of commercial profitability,
H. setting the price of potentially life-saving drugs cannot be left entirely to the judgement of pharmaceutical companies ,
I. welcoming the fact that, in the case of South Africa, an agreement was reached between the Republic of South Africa and the pharmaceutical industries,
J. the 35 million AIDS sufferers in developing countries are condemned to die if they do not have access to treatment ,
K. even though the fight against these three communicable diseases can be brought together in a single Community action programme, it is nevertheless necessary clearly to distinguish the specific problems posed by each of these diseases and, consequently, to differentiate between the measures to be taken in each case,
L. the recent resurgence of tuberculosis, which had been partly eradicated, is chiefly the result of poor sanitary conditions and poor living conditions in general, in addition to the comparative ineffectiveness of the BCG vaccination.
Even if drugs are affordable, in the form of generic drugs, long-term treatment requires lengthy and intensive medical follow-up which health structures in developing countries are incapable of providing.
Resistance to available drugs increases in such conditions, since they are not used correctly.
A fresh boost should therefore be given to research into new forms of tri- and quadri-therapies and new molecules for treatment and prevention,
M. malaria chiefly affects the less-favoured populations of the South, living in tropical and humid zones, and as a result the prevention and treatment of this disease have not been the subject of intensive research by pharmaceutical laboratories.
Nevertheless, the zone susceptible to the disease is tending to spread northwards with more intensive migration and climate change.
Moreover, affordable drugs are becoming more and more ineffective as organisms are becoming increasingly resistant, whilst the most recent drugs remain too expensive.
As a result, research geared to effective prevention (in particular, by testing new vaccines) and new forms of treatment needs to be stepped up and, at the same time, the cost of new anti-malaria drugs needs to be reduced ,
N. AIDS currently represents the chief problem, since there is no preventive treatment and drugs are not accessible for the majority of the population in developing countries owing to their price.
The first priority is therefore to allow access to these drugs by reducing their cost, without however forgetting that prevention, medical follow-up and research are also vital ,
O. prevention of HIV/AIDS concerns not only issues linked to the situation as regards health policy or general living conditions but, in particular, social, cultural and religious issues, cultural practices and specifically the relationship between the sexes,
P. noting that women are particularly affected by communicable diseases in terms both of infection and of the subsequent economic burden and underlining the importance of involving women in health programmes because of their specific role in basic health care and health education, and to consult with women to ensure that they are fully integrated in the planning process and the implementation of health programmes ,
Q. medical screening, diagnosis, the administration of treatment and follow-up of diseases require an adequate health structure and, consequently, diseases can be treated only if health structures (medical centres, specific equipment, qualified staff, etc.) are appropriate ,
R. the effective prevention and treatment of communicable diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and TB, must be regarded as indispensable for the world community - and thus considered a 'global public good'.
Achieving and safeguarding this global public good cannot be left to market forces alone, but necessitates cooperation with the public sector as well as with civil society, on a national as well as global level ,
1.
Welcomes the European Commission's innovative and comprehensive policy framework and the Programme for Action (PFA) on accelerated action to confront HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria as they constitute coherent initiatives that extend beyond traditional strategies in addressing health and development in the context of poverty reduction in the developing countries; calls on the Commission to put in place a mechanism to ensure effective co-ordination across the Directorates General participating in the Programme for Action;
2.
Considers that, in order to efficiently implement the Community Programme for Action, funds have to be increased (notably Community aid, including EDF funding) and used, as a priority, for reinforcing healthcare services and structures (including building and improving medical centres, providing equipment and training medical staff) in developing countries.
This not only requires to invest more in basic health services, but also to ensure the transfer of know-how and technologies in order to develop national capacity and reach thus a higher level of self-sufficiency in developing countries; asks consequently the Commission to give priority to a continuous financial aid in this field, since well-functioning health care systems are essential components in the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria ;
3.
Stresses that EU actions should be based around the principles of sustainability and ownership by developing countries, and that finding sustainable solutions will require substantial political commitment from both developing countries and developed countries ;
4.
Points out that effective and coherent action against communicable diseases must simultaneously combine:
- prevention, through information and education campaigns, immunisation programmes and action to promote better living conditions, as good housing, work, nutrition etc, provide the best possible prevention - treatment, which implies access to drugs as well as the availability of health structures and staff - research into vaccines and drugs which are more effective and better suited to the population in developing countries,
5.
Calls on the European Union to adopt directives to untie development aid for tenders on healthcare related products and services.
Calls on the EU to play a leading role in providing sufficient funding and in establishing appropriate guidelines and support capacity building for more efficient untied procurement, local manufacturing and a tiered pricing mechanism with clear standards to ensure access to affordable pharmaceuticals at marginal costs for prevention and care for these communicable diseases.
That mechanism should be transparent and should not be limited in time or place so that all developing countries can benefit from it.
Likewise, rules on intellectual property in relation to the production, use and transport of affordable generic drugs should take account of the need to arrive at equitable prices;
6.
Regards that as one third of the world's population is under the age of 20, and that half of all new HIV infections occur in the 15-24 age group, calls on the Commission to give particular attention to preventing HIV infection in this age group providing them with information, education and services necessary to reduce their vulnerability to HIV infection, and promoting the use of condoms; takes the view that parents, primary and secondary school teachers, health workers, politicians, religious leaders etc. in the communities must be trained along these lines, and that these campaigns must take place in local schools and communities, with account being taken of local cultures;
7.
Supports the Commission's intention to contribute significantly to improved budgeting, financial management, planning, quality assurance, procurement through tendering, distribution, and optimal use of pharmaceuticals in developing countries;
8.
Points out that satisfactory responses to the issue of access to drugs and treatment can be found only as part of an increased effort on the part of industrialised countries in the field of development aid in general and support for health systems in developing countries in particular;
9.
Calls for the European Union, in support of prevention as well as treatment of HIV/AIDS, malaria and TB, to devote 10% of its development aid spending to policies on combating the main communicable diseases, support for health systems and population programmes;
10.
Calls for use to be made of the existing general preventative health programmes by increased efforts in the area of reproductive health; notes that among women HIV infection is increasing sharply in both rural and urban areas; notes the fact that often women do not get access to health services;
11.
Calls for the EU to ensure that the right of developing countries to produce and market within those countries generic medicines intended for the treatment of major epidemics is recognised at international level, without costs arising from intellectual property rights, by using the possibility offered by the TRIPS Treaty, particularly compulsory licenses, but also by periodically evaluating them and proposing any necessary amendments to that Treaty;
12.
Calls on governments in the developing world to allocate an appropriate level of national resources to health;
13.
Recalls, however, that the countries undergoing structural adjustment have been forced considerably to reduce their spending on public services, particularly in the social areas of health and education, in order to reduce their public deficits and thus comply with the macro-economic conditions laid down by their backers in exchange for granting aid and loans;
14.
Calls on the Member States to abolish tariffs and taxes on exports of essential drugs and equipment to developing countries in order to make health care in the developing countries more affordable;
15.
Supports the recommendation contained in the Commission's Plan for Action to support the efforts of the WHO to revise the criteria establishing the list of essential drugs in order to include costly drugs such as the anti-retrovirals;
16.
Calls on the Commission to continue to develop close working relationships with the WHO, UNAIDS and UNICEF, and the World Bank so that developing countries are encouraged to import only country-specific essential medicines thereby ensuring best use of national health budgets;
17.
Is convinced that better cooperation and partnership between NGOs, private and public sectors in healthcare delivery in developing countries can minimise the cost of procurement, distribution and delivery of medication and treatment;
18.
Stresses the need to improve links between NGOs, the private sector and the public sector in the area of health care in the developing countries and undertakes to contribute financially to this objective, inter alia by targeting Community aid towards reinforcing public services in the health care area and granting funds to local genuine and well established health-related NGOs to support their activities;
19.
Stresses that all measures in this area must take account of the cultural situation of each region and that priorities must be set in cooperation with local communities and NGOs, including patients’ associations;
20.
Emphasises the need for access to basic health-care provision in order effectively to combat the major infectious diseases in the framework of reducing poverty, and expects the Commission, in implementing the programme for action to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, to take account of the targets set in the regional estimates for 2001, in which a doubling of the budget for basic health care is provided for, and calls on the Commission to increase its 2001 budget for support measures in the areas of health care, combating AIDS and population policy (HAP = HIV/AIDS Prevention) by at least 2% over and above 2000 by spending at least 10% of the appropriations on HAP measures;
21.
Reaffirms that prevention policy must remain a central element in the fight against the spread of communicable diseases, given that prevention remains the most cost-effective way of combating the spread of the diseases, and urges the Commission to develop a prevention strategy especially targeted at the poorest and most vulnerable groups, particularly women, young girls and adolescents, and including information and education which are important in preventing infection and in helping the public to make correct choices to promote and maintain good health and welfare;
22.
Stresses that promoting optimum living conditions is an integral part of the overall strategy to combat communicable diseases; all EU development policies and programmes aimed at eradicating poverty and improving quality of life in the developing countries must therefore take account of health issues, including communicable diseases;
23.
Notes that, whilst welcoming the Commission's recognition of the problem and its willingness to adopt short- and long-term measures, there is a need for greater efforts by the Member States, which are increasingly failing to fulfil the international commitment they have given to provide 0.7% of GNP for development, to take specific initiatives within the World Health Organisation to add to the essential drugs list and to implement a plan to reduce cost of drugs, and stresses, in this context, the responsibilities of the pharmaceuticals companies; takes the view that this could include a Working Group within the WTO on Access to Medicines to work with the WHO and other international bodies to develop a global strategy;
24.
Recognises that day-care health centres to test, diagnose, treat and monitor progress of treatment of these diseases including support for the DOTS (Directly Observed Treatment Short Course) strategy for TB are essential in implementing the EC Programme for Action to confront communicable diseases;
25.
Supports the creation of regional and sub-regional quality control laboratory networks to ensure quality control of test reagents and pharmaceuticals (including generics) being used for treatment of these communicable diseases, according to WHO‑approved standards;
26.
Supports the transfer of significant additional means to the relevant development funds budget lines with the specific objective to enable capacity building in African research institutions and scientific networks to carry out themselves field testing of new drugs and vaccines in coordination with European efforts.
In this respect, the approach developed by the African Malaria Vaccine Testing Network could be followed;
27.
Urges the Commission to address with urgency the increasing prevalence of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS, through the provision of appropriate pre and post natal care for both mothers and their children;
28.
Calls on governments of developing countries to facilitate prompt local registration of pharmaceutical products approved by the EU and other industrialised countries, so that they may be available to their public without undue delay;
29.
Considers that although major pharmaceutical manufacturers of anti-retroviral and anti-malarial medicines have expressed the intention to reduce substantially their prices in the framework of special programmes of assistance to some Governments of developing countries, prices continue to be beyond the reach of most people who are too poor to be able to afford them without public funding at the national and or global levels;
30.Calls on all major pharmaceutical manufacturers of essential life-saving medicines to continue to collaborate with the EU and governments of the developing countries to offer, as a first step , further reductions (tiered pricing) in order to reach marginal costs, and as a second step, to implement a global tiered pricing system;
31.
Recognises the need for appropriate global measures, including readily identifiable packaging to prevent re-importation to western countries of tiered priced products destined for the poor; furthermore, the Commission should look at mechanisms at EU level to ensure against product diversion and to explore ways in TRIPS to avoid re-exportation of products destined for poor countries to developed-country markets ;
32.
Recognises that in the short term a tiered pricing system is a response to the problem of access to medicines for developing country populations, but stresses that in the long term it is only part of the solution to the problem of communicable diseases in the developing countries;
33.
Calls for greater research and development efforts to find ways of combating tropical diseases more lastingly and to overcome the stagnation in developing new vaccines against tuberculosis.
The process of putting newly developed drugs to combat communicable diseases into production and bringing them into use in developing countries must be speeded up;
34.
Calls on pharmaceutical manufacturers not to remove live-saving, but unprofitable, drugs from the market, as they are necessary for treating diseases in developing countries; stresses that drugs which have been removed from the market for economic reasons should be allowed to be produced by local manufacturers in developing countries through voluntary licences;
35.
Calls on the EU, the USA, Japan and other industrialised countries to develop a range of initiatives, including appropriate legislation that would offer financial incentives , for increasing private-sector investment in research and development of vaccines and cheaper medicines for treating communicable diseases that mainly affect developing countries; takes the view that these incentives should be structured in such a way as to ensure that products thus developed are accessible for use in developing countries; considers that a start could be made on adopting such measures in the course of the next revision, in 2001, of EU medicine-licensing legislation;
36.
Calls on the European Union and the industrialised countries to encourage the transfer of technologies and knowledge in order to establish or strengthen capacities for the local or regional production of essential medicines in developing countries and stresses the need to promote voluntary licensing, in particular as regards intermediate countries;
37.
Asks the Commission and the Council to create a joint undertaking (research agency) according to Article 171 of the Treaty in close association with developing countries so as to organise and monitor faster release of new vaccines and treatments and clinical testing in the population most in need;
38.
Stresses that a global strategy for confronting communicable diseases can succeed only if appropriate and affordable vaccines and medicaments are developed for prevention and treatment.
Such a programme requires commitment to finance purchase and distribution of these products on a global basis (as for polio vaccine).
A global fund should be established to target the three major communicable diseases (FFID - Fund for Infectious Diseases).
Such an "outcome-driven" fund, under the aegis of the WHO and of UNAIDS, supported by the EU, G8, the World Bank, IMF and open to public and private contributions (public private partnership with NGOs included), can complement ongoing support to strengthen national health infrastructures and promote access to medicines and treatment; allocation to a global fund should be additional to existing aid efforts and be framed in the context of health as a global public health good ;
39.
Acknowledges that there are safeguards within TRIPS to address the imbalance between the protection of patents - essential for continued research and development of new products including vaccines - and the right of everyone to access affordable treatment; acknowledges that compulsory licensing is already provided in TRIPS in cases of health emergency and calls on the Commission and the TRIPS Council to clarify where Article 31 of TRIPS may be used and to provide a transparent assessment of the impact the agreement has on access to essential medicines; realising as well that most developing countries are experiencing huge difficulties in interpreting and making use of the safeguards;
40.
Recognises the role of patents in the development of essential drugs, supports the Commission in its view that there does not necessarily have to be a contradiction between the protection of intellectual property rights and accessible health care in developing countries, emphasises, however, that unfortunately in practice this may be the case;
41.
Insists on the instrument of compulsory licensing but requests the Commission to prepare and then submit to Parliament and Council, a well-argued proposal for a mandate to be granted to the Commission which intends to examine and propose ways and means seeking to review the relevant articles of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) in order to :
a) Reduce the patent protection granted for 20 years and laid down in the TRIPS agreement in a number of patented medicines only in the field of communicable diseases, b) Specify the conditions under which the practice of ‘ever-greening’ – i.e. process of introducing ‘minor changes’ to a patented drug upon expiry – would be eligible;
42.
Welcomes the positions recently adopted by all players in this field on a pro-public health interpretation of TRIPS and emphasises the need to encourage a more equitable sharing of the benefits of technological development in terms of health between people in developed countries and people in developing countries and to support Commissioner Lamy in his efforts to launch a debate in the WTO on reconciling the TRIPS agreement with objectives regarding health protection in developing countries;
43.
Calls for the establishment of a technical and legal assistance mechanism within the WTO in order to promote implementation of the TRIPS agreement which takes account of the specific public health interests of the developing countries, and to prevent the adoption of restrictive legislation in this field;
44.
Considers that the setting-up of a WTO working party on access to medicines, with WHO and UNAIDS participation, must make it possible to respond to this concern;
45.
Reiterates that the TRIPS Agreement allows local manufacture of generic equivalents of patented medicines in cases of national emergencies or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial use without authorisation of the right holder through compulsory licensing, and developing countries should be encouraged to seek EC technical assistance to collaborate with appropriate manufacturers to realise cheaper and wider access to medication and treatment for those in need;
46.
Recognises that the basic laws of demand and supply if applied to countries characterised by limited purchasing power will not be favourable to attracting the R&D effort of pharmaceutical companies to develop drugs against communicable diseases.
Proposes therefore that the 6th Framework Programme devote considerable funding to research into diseases of the poor, and co-operative projects with research or public institutes or private-public partnerships intended to benefit poverty-stricken countries, should be given priority;
47.
Requests the Commission to take the initiative for a proposal for neglected diseases (such as trypanosomiasis, filariasis, bilharzia and ebola); this proposal should provide incentive for the development of drugs and vaccines destined to combat poverty-related diseases for which there is a limited market;
48.
Emphasises in particular the need to guarantee over the long term increased and reliable financing for R&D relating to ‘forgotten diseases’ through a public commitment in the form of an international treaty ;
49.
Regrets that countries that have made use of the safeguard clause in the TRIPS agreements have come under pressure to withdraw their legislation in this area; considers, on the contrary, that the Commission and the Member States should defend in the appropriate fora the right of developing countries to use all the safeguard clauses provided by the WTO TRIPS agreement (compulsory licensing, parallel importation, generic production of essential pharmaceutical products, "Bolar" provisions) in the circumstances specified in the agreement and, if necessary, to request adaptation of the TRIPS rules in the WHO;
50.
Stresses that an appropriate increase in human resources, with expertise in social and human development, pharmaceutical policies and procurement, health, education and gender, be made available to the Commission, including the EC Delegations abroad, for the PFA to be properly implemented and monitored;
51.
Calls on the EU to support the development of substantial, sustained and efficient global financing mechanisms to enhance and extend existing funding to improve health in developing countries; takes the view that the EU should develop appropriate instruments to allow substantial contributions to emerging global health financing mechanisms and that allocations to a global fund should be additional to existing aid efforts and be framed in the context of health as a global public good;
52.
Instructs its President to forward this resolution to the Council and Commission, the WTO, WHO, UNAIDS, the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, the AU (African Union), the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations and relevant NGOs (OXFAM, Médecins sans frontières).
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT 1.
The circle of disease and poverty
Everyday, communicable diseases kill some 10.000 people in Africa.
A few years ago, malaria seemed close to being eliminated, yet today it is still the most common cause of death in sub-Saharan Africa affecting more and more people whilst spreading to areas which were previously free of the disease.
Although the DOTS (Directly Observed Treatment Short Course) programme for eradicating TB is medically and cost effective, tuberculosis continues to be the most widespread disease in the world.
HIV/AIDS is endemic in developing countries as so many remain unidentified untreated and unprotected.
Among women HIV infection is increasing sharply in both rural and urban areas; poverty tends to drive women into prostitution; for cultural reasons or because of fear of violence, women have very little power to insist on protected sex, particularly given the stigma surrounding condom use which links it to prostitution; preventive actions against HIV infection should address these factors; where necessary, political and religious leaders must be made aware of the gender aspect and be involved in the measures being taken.
35 million people are infected by AIDs who, without available treatment, are condemned to die.
This is unacceptable and causes unnecessary human suffering and death and the social and economic consequences of not treating these patients are dramatic in terms of life expectancy reduction, orphans, reduction of work force, etc.
These diseases seriously disable large working populations, retard social and economic development and destabilise communities as they impact on mortality rates and life expectancy in developing countries.
They make the poor even poorer!
None of the developing countries have adequate financial and technical resources to identify, treat and eradicate the scourge of these diseases.
How can we help the poor to maintain good health so that they can acquire the skills and technology to create local enterprise to be self-reliant?
There is an urgent need to establish a global fund - Infectious Disease Fund (IDF) - a fund supported by the EU, governments of industrialised countries, governments of oil-rich Arab states, international banks and agencies, rich corporations and millions of citizens all over the world.
Such a fund would help procure the medication and treatment, facilitate testing centres for diagnosis and treatment progress, prevention and social rehabilitation.
2.
EU contribution
The European Commission contribution to health assistance for the period 1990-1999 was Euros 4.2 billion through various instruments including EDF and budget lines.
Although Euros 700 million were allocated for health in 1998, the amount for 1996-98 was only 4% of total EU assistance.
Sadly, it has been too little for too many for too long!
Therefore, the EU development budget for health care, especially for the ACP countries, should be substantially increased as to reflect the need of the poor and to honour the Copenhagen Social Summit pledge to attain universal and equitable access to primary health care.
3.
A new policy framework
The Commission has submitted to the Council and Parliament, a new policy framework for accelerated action against these diseases.
This policy framework is developed in a Programme for Action (PFA), which establishes the EC response over the period 2001-2006 to the emergency caused by these communicable diseases.
The Programme began in earnest with a High Level Round Table in September of last year, which brought together six Commission DGs, NGOs and developing countries, leading pharmaceutical firms and agencies such as UNAIDS and the WHO.
The cooperation of these parties is intrinsic to the success of the PFA.
The EC will continue to seek cooperation and collaboration with all stakeholders to promote cheaper and wider access for treatment, screening of carriers and prevention of these diseases.
It will stimulate and liaise in establishing a global fund (IDF) and it will seek ways to enhance research and development for new and cheaper treatment regimes including vaccines.
4.
Research and Development
About 1233 new chemical entities were developed between 1975-1997 and only 13 of these were for the treatment of tropical diseases - 5 were a result of veterinary research, 2 were developed by the US Army, 3 were a result from research and development efforts of pharmaceutical companies and 2 are re-formulation of old drugs.
The vaccine for TB was developed in 1923 and the current best treatment for it was developed 30 years ago!
Clearly, research and development are not a priority for diseases of the poor!
A global fund - Infectious Disease Fund (IDF) - is essential to realise medication for those infected, screening to identify carriers, prevention and research and development of new drugs and vaccines.
5.
A ppraisal of the Commission strategy and PFA
The innovative and comprehensive strategy formulated to deal with the global emergency caused by the three major communicable diseases is the result of an unprecedented cooperation among different DGs of the Commission, going beyond traditional approaches.
It is a practical, achievable mix of development trade and research initiatives that the EU can adopt to improve the effectiveness of its interventions in this field.
6.
Conclusion
Substantial unspent funds in the 8th EDF and in other budget lines should be made available without delay to implement the EC's Programme for Action.
The EU must lead by formulating, motivating and mobilising a global effort to help urgently the poor who are devastated by these diseases.
It must build an extensive global network of projects and initiatives for prevention and treatment of these diseases that bring misery and death to so many every day!
The rapporteur believes that it is time that the European Parliament, the Commission and the Council give priority to assistance for health in developing countries so that the poor have a chance to be self-reliant!
30 May 2001 OPINION of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy
for the Committee on Development and Cooperation
on the communication of the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament concerning accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases within the context of poverty reduction
( COM(2000) 585 – C5‑0014/01 – 2001/2006 (COS))
Draftsman: Dorette Corbey
PROCEDURE
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy appointed Dorette Corbey draftsman at its meeting of 13 February 2001.
It considered the draft opinion at its meetings of 20 March 2001, 24 April 2001 and 28 May 2001.
At the last meeting it adopted the following conclusions by 25 votes to 12
The following took part in the vote/The following were present for the vote: Carlos Westendorp y Cabeza, chairman; Peter Michael Mombaur, vice-chairman; Dorette Corbey, draftsman; Konstantinos Alyssandrakis, Gérard Caudron, Giles Bryan Chichester, Elisa Maria Damião (for François Zimeray), Harlem Désir, Francesco Fiori (for Umberto Scapagnini), Christos Folias, Jacqueline Foster (for Roger Helmer), Norbert Glante, Alfred Gomolka (for Angelika Niebler), Cristina Gutiérrez Cortines (for Concepció Ferrer), Michel Hansenne, Malcolm Harbour (for Paul Rübig), Werner Langen, Rolf Linkohr, Caroline Lucas, Eryl Margaret McNally, Nelly Maes, Hans-Peter Martin (for Erika Mann), Giuseppe Nisticò (for Guido Bodrato), Reino Paasilinna, John Purvis, Imelda Mary Read, Mechtild Rothe, Christian Foldberg Rovsing, Konrad K. Schwaiger, Esko Olavi Seppänen, Helle Thorning-Schmidt (for Elena Valenciano Martínez-Orozco), Astrid Thors, W.G. van Velzen, Alejo Vidal-Quadras Roca, Anders Wijkman, Myrsini Zorba and Olga Zrihen Zaari.
CONCLUSIONS
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy calls on the Committee on Development and Cooperation, as the committee responsible, to incorporate the following points in its motion for a resolution:
1.
Considers the Commission’s communications under consideration as a useful guide to developing a comprehensive EU approach to its development policy with respect to those ACP countries hit by communicable diseases; emphasises that the availability of affordable essential drugs is insufficient and that today the poorest countries pay higher prices than they can afford; notes that even if free drugs were made available to those in need, under the current arrangements they would not reach them; regrets the fact that efforts to combat communicable diseases have been poorly coordinated between different services of the Commission, Member States, industry and NGOs.
Justification
The existing text assumes that patients in the developing countries pay higher prices than patients in developed countries..
It is therefore suggested that the sentence be reformulated to focus on what the poorest can actually afford and their inability to pay.
2.
Calls on the Commission to consider and report back to the European Parliament on a potential European Partnership between the Community, Member States and ACP countries suffering from communicable diseases in the context of Article 180 of the Treaty establishing the E.C. The European Partnership, inter alia, would bring together the necessary resources and efforts from three different sides:
a) funding of research in AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis from budget lines on research and development;
b) funding the establishment and construction of medical infrastructure in developing countries from the budget lines on development and research.
The initiative to establish a platform for clinical trials should be incorporated;
c) strengthening the social and economic infrastructure with funding from the budget for development.
Justification
Aids, malaria and tuberculosis yearly account for 5.000.000 victims world wide - albeit most in developing countries.
This underlines that joint action is urgently needed.
Funding from the Community should be seen as an impulse to and an incentive to Member States and the private sector to participate in the Partnership.
This new initiative would create a new dynamic and induce new proposals for better co-ordination on development co-operation required under Article 180 of the TEC.
This initiative is needed because affordable medicines are only one part of the solution to the health crisis in many developing countries.
Adequate medical infrastructure is needed, i.e. health care institutions, qualified staff, laboratories, etc.
But equally important is the social and economic infrastructure.
Clean water, storage capacity, roads are needed but also social support to overcome social stigma attached to some health problems.
Involvement of women's organisations, teachers, trade unions, churches is essential.
(See: Pharma - Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America, on the overhead infrastructure needs in LDCs.)
3.
Supports the proposal from the Commission to make the pharmaceutical industry apply “tiered pricing”, but is not persuaded by the mechanics of the system.
Asks the Commission to lay down the rules governing the pricing policy of any medicine (generic included) to be based on production costs plus a small mark-up, as well as rules on how the recipient agents could act as "donor agencies" for distribution of such medicines in poor countries.
Justification
One should note the following facts: "Effective pricing and global financing mechanisms must be developed to assure that vaccines are promptly available for use where they are needed" ( IAVI , July 9, 2000).
"The average production cost is around 20 per cent of the sales price, and after all other costs – including ongoing R&D costs – have been subtracted, the average operating profit is around 30 per cent of sales.”
(Oxfam Report ‘Dare to Lead ’ p.
16).
And another fact that the 'tiered pricing' allows the lowest possible prices to the poorest countries while keeping higher prices in developed countries.
It is a shame that at the moment prices in Africa are in some cases even higher then in the US.
“Tiered pricing” should be effective before 2006 when the TRIPs agreement is expected to be implemented in LDCs and consequently importing of generic products is hampered.
4.
Emphasises that safeguard clauses for eliminating the ‘problem of leakage’ are needed so that products sold at concessionary rates in poor countries should not be re-exported for re-sale in richer countries, and suggests distinctive packaging and clear labelling of drugs destined for LDCs.
Justification
Providing safeguard clauses on the 'problem of leakage' is an essential prerequisite for a new system that the draftsman proposes in the previous and subsequent conclusions to be efficient and to contribute to the stability of the market.
The industry should be invited to participate in designing effective safeguard clauses.
5.
Recognises the role of patents in the development of essential drugs, supports the Commission in its view that there does not necessarily have to be a contradiction between the protection of intellectual property rights and accessible health care in developing countries; emphasises, however, that unfortunately in practice this is the case; hence requests the Commission to take the initiative for a proposal for neglected diseases by industry; their proposal should provide incentives for the development of drugs and vaccines destined to combat poverty-related diseases for which no market exists.
Justification
There is clearly a market failure in the area of R&D in poverty related diseases.
Of 1450 new medicines marketed between 1972 and 1997, only 13 were specifically for tropical diseases and considered as essential drugs ( Tropical Medicine and International Health , Volume 4, no 6 p.
412).
Programmes to provide incentives to R & D for neglected diseases, analagous to the Orphan drugs approach are recommended by many organisations (see for instance: MSF working papers 'Drugs for Neglected Diseases Working Group).
Within the EU, these programmes could take the form of a directive.
6.
Insists on the instrument of compulsory licensing but requests the Commission to prepare and then submit to Parliament and Council, a well-argued proposal for a Mandate to be granted to the Commission which intends to examine and propose ways and means seeking to review the relevant articles of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) in order to :
a) Reduce the patent protection granted for 20 years and laid down in the TRIPS agreement to a maximum standard of 10 years in a number of patented medicines only in the field of communicable diseases,
b) Specify the conditions under which the practice of ‘ever-greening’ – i.e. process of introducing ‘minor changes’ to a patented drug upon expiry – would be eligible.
Justification
This is a proposal for a partial reform of the current TRIPS agreement (which was adopted after the Uruguay Round in 1994) and seeks to apply the logic of Articles 65 and 66 of TRIPS on transitional arrangements to a selective number of the poorest countries suffering from HIV/AIDS In fact, according to Jeffrey Sachs, “Drug companies sell their anti-retroviral drugs in developed countries for about USD 10,000 a year, though production costs are about USD 500 per year.
The drug companies have no customers for their products in Africa at these high prices and they would lose nothing by offering to sell them to the donor agencies at cost.
The agencies would then make them available for free to the poorest countries.
( Financial Times , 15 February 2001).
7.
Recognises that the basic laws of demand and supply if applied to countries characterised by limited purchasing power will not be favourable to attracting the R&D effort of pharmaceutical companies to develop drugs against communicable diseases.
Proposes therefore that the 6 th Framework Research Programme devote considerable funding to research into diseases of the poor, and co-operative projects with research or public institutes or public-private partnerships intended to benefit poverty-stricken countries, should be given priority.
Justification
“It is interesting to note what 13 eminent professors have said on the matter of research, patents and cost of vital medicines: “Patents are only means for promoting discovery and invention.
Scientific curiosity, coupled with the desire to benefit humanity, has been of far greater importance throughout history ( Financial Times ‘Letters to the Editor’ 15 February 2001).
And Oxfam states:“A range of initiatives, linking public sector and private philanthropy, have emerged to combat HIV/AIDS, leprosy, malaria, tuberculosis, lymphatic filiariasis, leishmaniasis, cholera, cancer, and diabetes.
Some initiatives provide vaccines, others medicines; some offer accelerated access to treatments, others R&D.”
(Oxfam Report ‘Dare to Lead’ p.
26)
8.
Supports the establishment of a platform for clinical trials, on the basis of Article 169, focusing on developing countries.
Setting up this platform is a long-term project, which will therefore be of help in accelerating the development of drugs and vaccines against HIV, malaria and tuberculosis only on a long-term basis.
In the meantime, other solutions to compensate for the lack of finance for clinical trials of some candidate vaccines/drugs should also be developed in parallel.
The European Parliament urges the Commission to continue looking at ways of finding solutions, under the 6th FWP, so as to move forward rapidly with the candidate vaccines/drugs which already exist.
Justification
The need for urgent action should be considered together with long-standing proposals.
The urgency of the issue cannot afford to wait for ambitious proposals that will need time to start running.
15 May 2001 OPINION of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy
for the Committee on Development and Cooperation
on the Commission communication on accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases within the context of poverty reduction
( COM(2000) 585 – C5‑0014/2001 – 2001/2006 (COS))
Draftsman: Karin Scheele
PROCEDURE
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy appointed Karin Scheele draftsman at its meeting of 12 March 2001.
It considered the draft opinion at its meeting of 14 May 2001.
It adopted the following conclusions unanimously.
The following were present for the vote: Caroline F. Jackson, chairman; Guido Sacconi and Alexander de Roo, vice-chairmen; Karin Scheele, draftsman; Per-Arne Arvidsson, Maria del Pilar Ayuso González, Hans Blokland, David Robert Bowe, Niels Busk (for Karl Erik Olsson), Martin Callanan, Dorette Corbey, Chris Davies, Avril Doyle, Carlo Fatuzzo (for John Bowis), Anne Ferreira, Laura González Álvarez, Robert Goodwill, Françoise Grossetête, Cristina Gutiérrez Cortines, Anneli Hulthén, Marie Anne Isler Béguin, Bernd Lange, Peter Liese, Torben Lund, Jules Maaten, Minerva Melpomeni Malliori, Jorge Moreira da Silva, Rosemarie Müller, Riitta Myller, Giuseppe Nisticò, Béatrice Patrie, Marit Paulsen, Jean Saint-Josse, Jacques Santkin (for Carlos Lage), Inger Schörling, Jonas Sjöstedt, Renate Sommer (for Marielle de Sarnez), Bart Staes (for Hiltrud Breyer), Catherine Stihler, Robert William Sturdy (for Marialiese Flemming), Nicole Thomas-Mauro, Antonios Trakatellis, Roseline Vachetta and Phillip Whitehead.
CONCLUSIONS
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy calls on the Committee on Development and Cooperation, as the committee responsible, to incorporate the following points in its motion for a resolution:
1.
Add the following citation:
- having regard to European Parliament resolution of 15 March 2001 on access to drugs for HIV/AIDS victims in the Third World ( B5-0182/2001 ),
2.
Add the following citation:
- having regard to the resolution of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly on the importation and local production of generic drugs (ACP-EU 3173/01)
3.
Modify recital C as follows:
inability to secure treatment through lack of access to medicines , and social exclusion, especially of women, disable the workforce and increase poverty risking stability in developing countries,
4.
Modify recital D as follows:
whilst detection of disease and sustained prevention are common for all three diseases, at present treatment can only cure TB and Malaria and medicines against retrovirals can reduce the number of AIDS-related deaths drastically.
The prices of these drugs help keep these medicines out of reach of millions of infected people ,
5.
Delete recital E.
6.
Add the following recital as recital E a (new):
Ea. welcomes the fact that, in the case of South Africa, an agreement was reached between the Republic of South Africa and the pharmaceutical industries,
7.
Add the following recital as recital E b (new):
Eb. whereas access to drugs is crucial not only in combating the three major communicable diseases, but also for other communicable diseases like Ebola that cause serious threats for health and social development in entire regions,
8.
Add the following recital as recital E c (new):
Ec. whereas treatments are often not available due to a lack of production of drugs on grounds of commercial profitability,
9.
Add the following recital as recital E d (new):
Ed. notes that women are particularly affected by communicable diseases in terms both of infection and of the subsequent economic burden and underlines the importance of involving women in health programmes because of their specific role in basic health care and health education,
10.
Modify paragraph 2 as follows:
2.
Welcomes the EC commitment to lead a global effort to provide sufficient funding and to establish appropriate guidelines and support capacity building for more efficient untied procurement, local manufacturing and a tiered pricing mechanism with clear standards to ensure access to affordable pharmaceuticals for prevention and care for these communicable diseases;
11.
Add the following paragraph as paragraph 3a (new):
3a.
Stresses that EU actions should be based around the principles of sustainability and ownership by developing countries, and that finding sustainable solutions will require substantial political commitment from both developing countries and developed countries;
12.
Modify paragraph 4 as follows:
4.
Calls on governments in the developing world to allocate an appropriate level of national resources to health.
Supports the work of the EC in analysing the effects of tariffs and taxes on consumer prices for drugs ;
13.
Modify paragraph 7 as follows:
7.
Stresses the importance of information and education in prevention from infections , stressing the particular role of women and improving gender sensitivity;
14.
Delete paragraph 10.
15.
Modify paragraph 12 as follows:
12.
Calls on all major pharmaceutical manufacturers of essential life saving medicines to collaborate with the EU and governments of the developing countries to offer, as a first step, further reductions (tiered pricing) and, as a second step, to implement a global tiered pricing system ;
16.
Add the following paragraph as paragraph 12 a (new):
12a.
Recognises that to provide access to treatment it is essential to combine affordable pricing for medicines with adequate funds for purchasing and good quality healthcare system;
17.
Add the following paragraph as paragraph 14 a (new):
14a.
Calls on pharmaceutical manufacturers not to remove live-saving, but not profitable drugs, from the market, as they are necessary for treating diseases in developing countries.
Stresses that drugs which have been removed from the market for economic reasons should be allowed to be produced by local manufactures in developing countries (through voluntary licenses);
18.
Modify paragraph 15 as follows:
15.
Calls on the EU, USA, Japan and other industrialised countries to consider appropriate legislation that will offer financial incentives (e.g. tax exemptions on sale of final product for a limited period) to stimulate research and development of vaccines and cheaper medicines for treating communicable diseases; in this context notes the value of publicly funded research as one of the available alternatives;
19.
Modify paragraph 16 as follows:
16.
Stresses that a global strategy for confronting communicable diseases can succeed only if appropriate and affordable vaccines are developed for prevention.
Such an immunisation programme requires commitment to finance purchase and distribution of vaccines on a global basis (as for polio vaccine).
This Infectious Disease Fund (IDF) should be supported by the EU, G8, the World Bank, IMF and such agencies;
20.
Add the following paragraph as paragraph 17 a (new):
17a.
Calls on the Commission to support the right of developing countries to use the safeguards in the TRIPS Agreement and to support Commissioner Lamy in his efforts to launch a debate in the WTO on reconciling the TRIPS Agreement with objectives regarding health protection in developing countries;
21.
Modify paragraph 18 as follows:
18.
Reiterates that the TRIPS Agreement allows local manufacture of generic equivalents of patented medicines in cases of national emergencies or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial use without authorisation of the right holder through compulsory licensing.
Developing countries should be encouraged to seek EC technical assistance to collaborate with appropriate manufacturers to realise cheaper and wider access to medication and treatment for those in need.
30 May 2001 OPINION of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities
for the Committee on Development and Cooperation
on the communication of the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament: Accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases within the context of poverty reduction
( COM(2000) 585 – C5-0014/2001 – 2001/2006(COS))
and the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament: Programme for Action: Accelerated action on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis in the context of poverty reduction
( COM(2001) 96 - C5-0112/2001 - 2001/2006(COS))
Draftsperson: Jillian Evans
PROCEDURE
The Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities appointed Jillian Evans draftsperson at its meeting of 23 January 2001.
It considered the draft opinion at its meetings of 23 April 2001 and 28 May 2001.
At the latter meeting it adopted the following conclusions unanimously with one abstention.
The following were present for the vote: Maj Britt Theorin, chairperson; Jillian Evans, vice-chairperson and draftsperson; María Antonia Avilés Perea, Fiorella Ghilardotti, Lissy Gröner, Anna Karamanou, Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, Astrid Lulling, Thomas Mann, Christa Prets, Miet Smet and Patsy Sörensen.
CONCLUSIONS
The Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities calls on the Committee on Development and Cooperation, as the committee responsible, to incorporate the following points in its motion for a resolution:
Paragraph
1.
Draws the attention to the fact that women bear the main burden of poverty in society despite being the main wage earner in many developing countries; therefore, in order to ensure their effectiveness, health programmes to target the poorest must include a specific focus on women;
Paragraph
2.
Is of the opinion that before programmes start it is crucial to analyse the role of women in the countries targeted and to consult with women to ensure that they are fully integrated in the planning process and the implementation of health programmes;
Paragraph
3.
Notes the fact that women often do not get access to health services due primarily to high costs but also to long distances and lack of infrastructure; poverty and lack of access are major factors in women's dissatisfactory health situation, which has a negative effect on the rest of the family;
Paragraph
4.
Notes that among women HIV infection is increasing sharply in both rural and urban areas; poverty tends to drive women into prostitution; for cultural reasons or because of fear of violence, women have very little power to insist on protected sex, particularly given the stigma surrounding condom use which links it to prostitution; preventive actions against HIV infection should address these factors; where necessary, political and religious leaders must be made aware of the gender aspect and be involved in the measures being taken;
Paragraph
5.
Considers it crucial that women should be recognised as playing the most important role in health issues in developing countries as the main carers of elderly and young people as well as main educators of children; points out that all health programmes should be designed on that basis;
Paragraph
6.
Strongly suggests that any new initiatives like this one should, in principle, be added to the existing efforts to improve health care; ensuring added value is crucial in the development of such programmes so that funds already provided for existing programmes are not curtailed;
Paragraph
7.
Calls for use to be made of the existing general preventive health programmes by increased efforts in the area of reproductive health;
Paragraph
8.
Welcomes the new programme and demands that the infrastructure of health care is developed in connection with and as a complement to the various criteria; this means providing adequate research resources and using them to ensure that there is sufficient transfer of knowledge and technology to create a higher degree of self-sufficiency in developing countries; notes that efforts should be made to ensure the effective transfer of funds for these purposes to countries outside the European Union;
Paragraph
9.
Recommends that emphasis should be put on preventative action to tackle the underlying causes of ill health amongst women; priority should be given to educating and training women in the basics of health care and general awareness raising of health issues, in their own interest but also as being instrumental to the health of the other members of the family and in particular additional impetus should be given to the distribution of free condoms and medicinal products which prevent the transmission of the HIV/AIDS virus from mother to child; notes that curative care goes hand in hand with preventative actions when dealing with transmittable diseases such as Aids, malaria and TB; knowing that a cure is available encourages people to submit to screening and participate in the control of transmission; points out that it is morally unacceptable to condemn millions of people to die while knowing that treatment exists;
Paragraph
10.
Notes that, whilst welcoming the Commission's recognition of the problem and its willingness to adopt short and long term measures, there is a need for greater efforts by the Member States, which are increasingly failing to fulfil the international commitment they have given to provide 0.7% of GNP for development, to take specific initiatives within the World Health Organisation to add to the essential drugs list and to implement a plan to reduce cost of drugs and stresses, in this context, the responsibilities of the pharmaceuticals companies; takes the view that this could include a Working Group within the WTO on Access to Medicines to work with the WHO and other international bodies to develop a global strategy;
Paragraph
11.
Points out that a tiered pricing system should be sustainable, transparent in its principles, rules and regulations and guarantee that essential drugs are available and affordable at the lowest price possible to all those who need them; to guarantee sustainability, voluntary licensing and transfer of technology have to become a reality; development and improvement of production of generic drugs in developing countries can be encouraged in this way;
Paragraph
12.
Requests that the EU should adopt a pro-public health interpretation of the TRIPS agreement and act at the WTO to clarify whether there is sufficient flexibility in TRIPS to prevent it becoming a barrier to access to all medically essential medicines.
